# The Prison of American Politics

Jan. 26 2021  

The past several weeks have witnessed the blooming of a new authoritarianism in the United States.  It’s unsurprising to see many elites cheerleading this development, but the public strangulation of freedoms Americans have historically protected is finding surprising purchase among large portions of the population.  Why would the open subversion of American democracy and political freedoms have such a large constituency among average people?  For decades Americans have been told by elites in the media that society in the United States is being undermined, both by actors abroad and crucially by domestic political opponents.  No matter which direction we look for information about the news of the day this same general theme is ever present.  Things are out of control, and it is our fellow citizens who are most enthusiastically dragging us closer and closer to the precipice.  With the election of Donald Trump in 2016 the breathlessness with which elites promulgate this supposed crisis has only grown more frantic and extreme.

Many of the tenets justifying this crisis narrative are pure fantasy, however it has been incredibly successful.  The slow, suffocating decline of the middle class over the last 50 years has meant that many Americans are facing very real crises and a loss of financial and communal stability.  Elites have been very adept at shifting the blame for this misery onto contrived conflicts that pick at divisions among Americans separated by geography, culture and class.  By doing this they have created a politics driven substantially by hatred and fear.  A recent YouGov poll found that more than half of Americans, regardless of political affiliation, saw other people living in the US as the greatest threat to their way of life.  A consequence of this resentment for so many people is that every national election cycle has taken on existential proportions.  Americans believe they are struggling over the levers of power in Washington for fear of the destruction and deprivation that could be unleashed should their party lose.  This political drama can tend toward the operatic as many Americans, especially among the elite, reimagine their mundane partisan activities as courageously resisting malevolent forces mere moments away from affecting the absolute destruction of our national system, and abolishing our most cherished freedoms.  For many others this constant conflict forms the background noise of the chattering classes and has helped shape their sense of anxiety about the future into fear of and resentment toward other Americans.  How did we get to this place, and what are the forces shaping the  reality of our current moment?

One of the  reasons that so many feel under constant threat has a lot to do with the media, and the way they execute their function of informing the public.  The business model of our corporate news media requires the segmenting of people along ideological lines to capture market share, and then creating evermore monstrous horrors to keep them glued to the screen. It wasn’t always this way, but changes in technology and political economy have incentivised a divisive and dangerous media model.

While this change was taking place in TV news the rise of social media first seemed to offer a way out, but corporate and financial elites quickly devised ways of better controlling and profiting from these new technologies.  As their grip on these new social spaces tightened, the platforms many Americans had come to rely on for basic communications began to increasingly reflect the corporate narrative about American life.  Social media companies' decision to adopt the advertising model of television had led them into some of the same basic dysfunctions as the corporate news media.  The algorithms silicon valley developed to serve content to users discovered that the best way to increase engagement (and therefore ad revenue) on their platforms was by feeding the users increasingly extreme content to provoke an emotional reaction from them without driving them away from the screen.  Much of traditional media have come to rely heavily on these platforms to attract audiences.  This has meant that even traditional print media, and alternative independent news outlets are caught in a cycle of either escalating the intensity and partisanship of their content, or losing market share to those who will. 

It’s important to recognize that the drive to intensify division has not been limited to corporate or large national news outlets.  The way developers structure online platforms has enforced, through its demand for ad views and clicks, a structure that engages average users’ and content creators’ in the dysfunction of the broader system.  Even when individual personalities engaged in political discussion online make a conscious effort to avoid some of this toxicity in their approach the demands of these platforms seem to force a kind of conformity to conflict driven expression.  Alternative sources of information and “entertainment” on the left and the right, “influencers” or other media figures who often present themselves as independent voices of moderation, reason or “straight-talk”, are engaged in some of the most toxic and hate filled rhetoric against those they want their audiences to perceive as enemies.  Ultimately, this is a self-serving enterprise and the competitive pressure within the ad driven structure of online media creates the incentive for these individuals to conform to a narrative of cultural conflict.

The contemporary imperatives of the advertising model have resulted in a volatile social and political situation.  Both left and right, from the radicals to the centrist, seem to believe their government is on the brink of falling to a “fascist” threat.  It’s commonplace to hear people of broadly Democratic alignment describe Republicans or their base as fascists.  It’s equally common to hear right-wing or Republican aligned commentators refer to the “left” as fascist, even joking about the irony in the name of a Democrat affiliated group who call themselves “Antifa”, short for "anti-fascist".  In the various “resistance movements” that have congealed primarily through social media, but also notably in the liberal press, people see themselves not just fighting a rising fascism among a small minority, but one they imagine in most accounts to be supported by tens of millions of their fellow citizens.  If this were true one would think the fascists must be overjoyed at the prospect of their total victory being so close at hand.  However, a group resembling this upbeat fascist threat seems to be totally absent from anywhere on the national scene. It’s a maddening situation when trying to consider what must be real.  Why do so many people see themselves in such extreme conflict with their fellow citizens, and more importantly why do they believe that it is possible that their freedom and their very lives are under threat from political opponents in what is ostensibly a democratic society?

It would be easy to blame the panic people feel over threats to their freedom entirely on the workings of our media, but I think there is a bit more going on here.  The information media that Americans consume is an important piece of the puzzle.  It has been a major driver in the citizenry identifying itself as the enemy of democracy.  The roots of the fear, however, go much deeper and touch on fundamental parts of American society and how power organizes itself politically.

Without going through the entire modern history of American politics it is enough to understand that this division in American society did not start with the changes in news media over the last three decades.  Although these changes have accelerated this divisionism, it began in its current form during the crisis of democracy American elites experienced following the post-war period.  In response to growing unrest and falling corporate profits elite political operatives began inventing ways to appeal to voters who were increasingly marginal to the functioning of the economy without offering any solutions to their marginalization.  Deriving conflict by stoking cultural divisions in American society became their primary method of politics.  By following this strategy elites only needed to promise to protect their partisan constituents from their fellow citizens to gain elected office rather than pledge to change course on the deprivation their economic policies were visiting on a growing margin of Americans.  

By the early 90s the decimation of labor unions had consolidated the political donor class for both parties among the richest Americans representing industry and finance.  Once neither party was reliant on institutions representing labor, the economic consensus among elites stripped political discourse of any need to address the problems created by their economic policy goals.  Rather, as the immiseration of Americans accelerated through the Neoliberal era the need to obfuscate the origins and consequences of those policies demanded that elites intensify culture war rhetoric to meet the growing dissatisfaction.

In the new century, contemporary information technology has only added to the perception among many Americans of a deep cultural division in society.  From inside of the shrinking ideological bubbles of social media the conflict throughout American society seems to grow in proportion, and intensifies people’s feelings of imbattlement.  The perception of a vast gulf between two culturally distinct American societies is less supported by peoples material reality, but more deeply felt than ever before.  The crisis of inequality and economic disenfranchisement have continued to ratchet up the force with which elites must promote this perception.  In the wake of multiple financial crises and recessions, anger over America’s dimming fortunes has begun to be directed toward the elite classes.  In response, the culture war seems to be entering a new phase to counter this growing discontent.

In the 1980’s it would have been ridiculous to suggest that the culture war was the basis for a break in American society so fundamental that it would lead to civil war.  Somehow, 40 years later, though little has changed among the main points of contention, the assertion that civil war is a possible consequence of cultural grievance is now commonplace among talking heads on all sides.  Centrist Conservatives and Liberals, radical Leftists and Right-wingers all declare in dark tones that civil war is the inevitable outcome once the “otherside” has pushed too far.  While this assertion isn’t any less ridiculous in 2021, it does portend a certain kind of danger, and highlights a derangement particular to our time.  The danger in so many people taking this idea for granted is that it could result in actual violence, and in some indirect ways has already manifested in actions like the rioters who forced their way into the Capitol on January 6th.  Additionally, the nihilism inherent in perceiving your political situation this way was also a motivating factor in much of the violence and rioting seen over the summer of 2020.

The reason that the prediction of civil war is no less ridiculous now than it was in the 80s is part of the key to understanding what is really happening now, and why people are so upset.  There is no possibility of civil war because there are no clearly definable sides to fight it.  The narrative would have you believe that Democrats, representing Liberal Progressive values, and Republicans, representing Coservative values, are going to form armies and fight it out in the streets of America over who gets to realize their cultural ideal through monopoly control of the state.  Are liberal, cosmopolitan city dwellers really going to take up arms against the rural population of conservative gun owners and evangelicals, or vise versa?  Many people, if not nearly everyone, have close family members who hold opposing political and cultural attitudes to their own.  Are they all going to pick up guns and fight one another?  What about the tens of millions of liberals who live in rural areas?  The conservatives who live in cities?  Even the military is a more heterogeneous entity than most acknowledge.  Will it too be divided along some invisible line?  

How many Americans are really willing to die for what are mostly petty grievances inflated through the dynamic of culture war to seem monumental.  How quickly will that animus deflate in the face of life altering violence?  How many people will feel it deflate at the imposition of even a mild inconvenience to their lives?  The incoherence of this idea speaks to a deep disconnection from reality that is hard to imagine being possible at any other time.  And yet, it’s an idea that probably just about every American has been confronted with in the last several years, and many accept as an inevitable outcome of our current situation.

How can so many of us be convinced that the people we know in our own lives are so odious and menacing that it will take a war to settle our disagreements?  I can’t believe that this is true, and it seems obvious to me that the fear and the hate being whipped up in our society is self defeating, and the emotional volatility people are experiencing during real crises is being exploited by media figures, both large and small, left and right.  By channeling this discontent into the anti-politics of culture war we are collectively disempowering ourselves at a time when multiple crises threaten to impoverish our futures.  Instead of being able to act democratically to address these crises we are paralyzed by the unreality in which we're enmeshed.  

A democratically responsive government should be more possible than ever, but the leaders we elect have continued to fall short of meeting their responsibilities.  It seems hopeless and while we’re all transfixed by this illusion of whirling nightmares, another force has risen in society.  It is not the fascism of our collective fever dream, but something more concrete.  It is the true source of our terror when confronted with political defeat at the ballot box.

People really do feel like the walls are closing in on them.  That the country is one bad election result away from absolute tyranny.  Why?  It isn’t obvious that people living in a democracy should be terrified of their political opponents winning an election, but that is where we find ourselves.  The fact that this is a bipartisan feeling is also extremely important.  We’ve been trained to fear and hate one another through the culture war.  We’ve been whipped into a frenzy by a technological echo chamber of news and information that reinforces and amplifies our most negative and emotionally irrational reactions.  But, it still doesn’t follow that we believe an irrecoverable loss of freedom to tyranny is one election away.  Unless, that is, we believe a system of control and domination needed to enact such an authoritarian state has already been created.  

The unspoken acknowledgement behind our fear of losing an election is the understanding that such a system is currently in place.  The reality that is hidden from us by the lies of the culture war is that authoritarian domination is not about to come into being when our political rivals win the next election, but is already at work in our society.   It exists now.  We acknowledge the capacity of the powerful to tyrannically dominate us, but not that they do dominate us.  We believe that our farce of a political system is capable of democratic control, but we are afraid of our partisan rivals.  We imagine them ascending to control the levers of power in Washington and threatening democracy because we are unable to see ourselves as already embedded in a wholly illegitimate system.  One that they are just as incapable of controlling as we are.  It is a system that has always been under the control of an elite who is fully intent on using it to maintain their grip on power.  

Election after election Americans have voted for change and yet the root of our collective anxiety is never addressed.  We know something is wrong, and fall deeper and deeper into crisis as our efforts within the framework provided never bear fruit.  The culture war frames our actions to divert effort away from actual politics toward the anti-political battles over grievance and resentment.  Within it we believe we are acting toward some end or against some threat, but our targets are phantoms, the smoke screen of a unified power, and so our efforts are meaningless.  The slow realization of waking from this delusion is that the future for political freedom we thought was guaranteed to us by our citizenship has already been foreclosed.  The source of our collective panic is this felt reality to which we are only half aware.

We all watched over the past 25 years as a secret system of laws and surveillance was erected around us that gave terrifying power to the state and its collaborators.  We fear not just the state but the corporate monopolies that we depend upon not just for communication and connection, but the very infrastructure on which our businesses, our jobs, and our lives depend.  We know from the Snowden leaks that the tech giants have all but merged with the security state.  The corporate tech companies we rely on for critical infrastructure have taken for themselves the right to track and record everything we do on the internet, watch our movements and listen to our conversations.  Whether through secret sharing agreements or service contracts we understand that there is little separation between these surveillance entities and the secretive government security services that can arrest us, throw us into solitary confinement forever, and even kill us with impunity. 

We watched this authoritarian apparatus of the state be constructed and rationalized that it would never be turned on us.  Crises continue to mount and as we watch inequality explode the horizons for political possibility within the current system are dim.  I think everyone is recognizing that the need for some fundamental change is growing more dire everyday, and yet our politics seems incapable of affecting even the minimum of the changes necessary.  Americans have voted for change again and again, and yet the problems are never addressed, leading to cynicism and rage.  The continuous recycling of this rage back into the two party culture war has led many to conclude that change is impossible without giving in to the urge for authoritarian domination.  However, any authoritarianism we allow will not be one that we control or that offers any solace to the afflicted of our society.  Change seems impossible, because many of us have dedicated ourselves to not recognizing where we are.  

In the waning light of American freedom, culture war is the prison cell of our political psyche.  We’re living through its latest fantasy of political strife.  Watching it play across the walls among the staccato shadows of a barred window, and the light from a darkening horizon somewhere beyond.  When we fear one another we hand ourselves over to the grotesque elites who command the terms of our imprisonment.  By engaging in the culture war we accept the impossibility of self-rule.  As a society, we’ve deeply invested ourselves in an anti-politics that deftly excludes any chance of fundamental change by realizing political power for the vast majority of the American people.  In light of this commitment maybe it’s easier to imagine killing one another over abortion, or gun ownership than it is to imagine overcoming the techno-feudal corporatism into which our capitalist system is disintegrating.  Whatever future we choose to imagine, it will make little difference unless we decide to stop fighting one another, and find a way out.