# The Undead Left

Mar. 21 2021

Since the collapse of the Bernie campaign one year ago I have felt a distinct kind of dislocation from my previous ideas about “politics” as it’s constituted in the US.  I suspect that this is not anything approaching a unique experience.  My sense of dissatisfaction with the way the current paradigm is understood goes back much further, but I will admit that during the past 5 or so years I was “bought-in” to an extent that was a departure from the preceding decade.  Whatever other’s reaction to this change has been I can say that mine has been one of deep cynicism, but also an appetite for honest exploration and a near manic desire for alternative ways of locating myself within the current malaise. The path of least resistance being ushered by the now established leaders and prophets of leftism in the post Bernie landscape are so woefully inadequate that it’s sometimes embarrassing to think I ever put stock in them.

I was, it seems, a part of the left, but that is not true anymore.  I am deeply disappointed with the failure of many individuals who I have looked to for wisdom over the past decade and a half.  Very few have decided to risk their security and influence to truly grapple with the failure.  The old and the new left seem to be out of ideas.  It’s program has run its course.  Now, many who once saw themselves as invaders bent on razing the castle have settled on small plots outside its walls, collect taxes from the serfs and send tributes to the king.

Those who tout the success of the Bernie campaign struggle to justify the idea.  Often what they seem to be articulating is success for themselves.  They’ve experienced an advancement in their own personal proximity to power.  Influencers on the left who were “failsons” and fledgling adjunct professors 5 years ago now attract sizable audiences on monopoly tech platforms and interview high-profile guests for an ever expanding mess of left identity branded youtube channels, magazines and podcasts.  The success of a movement in this case seems like a very peculiar understanding that it is successful once it has been absorbed into the broader ranks of the upper-middle class elite.  

I think the left of 10 years ago would try to understand this as a defense mechanism of the capitalist system.  It seems more likely that the commitment to an anti-capitalist program expressed by those who have now found themselves on top of the heap was, if not less than sincere, less than an actual commitment.  Carving out what now appear as conventionally successful careers in entertainment or cultural commentary may not have been the goal starting out, but became the end justifying the means the moment it seemed possible. Regardless, success isn’t the worst sin of the left influencers.

In fact, it’s been funny to see some of the less savvy, or maybe just less cynical among them actually begin to publicly justify their windfall earnings and newly acquired bourgeois lifestyles.  Saying that after all, bourgeois excess is not something that “socialists'' oppose.  In fact, they believe the proletariat should be able to enjoy those luxuries too, so there’s no problem with someone cashing in on their celebrity to buy access to the exclusive life of the elite.  They are the advanced guard after all.  Maybe one day all the other proles will catch-up.

Although these instances of crude self indulgence are ugly and absurd, the success some have found by selling an identity based around left politics isn’t the problem.  The problem is they have no ideas, and no ability to form them.  They’re dead as a movement, and dead things that continue to move and speak are evil.