# Why the Left is Dead

Apr. 12 2021

Why’s the left dead?  The Bernie campaigns in 2016 and 2020 seemed like an opportunity, but ultimately only brought a new generation of young people into the Democratic Party project.  Apart from that failure, the culture and attitude of most of the “online” Left is toxic, self-defeating and bears the signature authoritarianism of the American elite.  The ideological idiocy of the Left is not special.  It differs from the general political culture in the US only in its tendency toward an anti-social hipster aesthetic.  This pathetic and backwards culture is deliberately repulsive and seems to appeal mostly to pedant losers.  Worse, whatever this thing that says it’s the “Left” is has now fully fixed itself to the Democratic Party, one of the most despicable and disgusting institutions elites have been able to create in the history of the country.

This online Left sees itself absurdly as a Socialist or Working Class movement.  In reality leftists appear to be more accurately described as a type of Democratic media consumer.  More a small ecosystem of media products like podcasts, youtube channels, and online periodicals, this left’s only national institution is a struggling socialist book club turned political organization which after explosive growth in the last 6 years has dedicated itself to mostly running phone banking drives for Democratic primary candidates.  The DSA went from being mostly old white-collar activists to mostly young white-collar professionals and graduate students so dissatisfied with the Democratic Party’s boomer leadership that they decided to rebel by joining another organization and then force it to merge with the Democratic Party coalition.

With the destruction of truly working class left movements in the middle of last century the traditions of Socialism and Marxism were relegated to the academy, signalling the death knell for any legitimate movement claiming those traditions within the United States.  These traditions faded from the working class partially through elite campaigns to crush them, but also because they simply aged out of relevance to the contemporary context of working people’s lives.  In addition, the incredible unattractiveness of publicly aligning oneself with traditionally left wing ideas within elite academic and cultural circles led to the ideas languishing in intellectually tepid waters.  This created a dynamic whereby few, if any, new ideas have come out of the Left in the last half-century and it has been unable to adapt a coherent vision to the contemporary political context.

Eventually, Leftism adorned with an aggressive faux anti-establishment ideology grew from these roots among some parts of establishment academia.  However skeptical of mainstream views on political economy and American history these academics claimed to be, they isolated themselves in institutions of higher learning that had increasingly become a mechanism of exclusion and control for most of the working population.  Instead of creating new ideas, and largely irrelevant to political organization, many have occupied themselves by squabbling over which combination of historical figures’ writings most perfectly describe the imaginary world in which they would prefer to live.

The incapacity of this group to actually accomplish anything but the reiteration of increasingly esoteric and alienating worldviews exemplifies their commitment to failure.  They may as well be some mechanism of capitalist control, themselves.  I would say that it’s a capitalist plot to divert energy toward some dead end, but the truth is that the self-selected group forming “the Left” was never going to participate in a truly emancipatory movement anyway.  In so far as it is politically active at all it is nothing more than an extremist wing of the Democratic Party apparatus, and therefore bears it’s primary attribute.

This attribute is one of not actually being a political project at all.  The Democratic Party and the reactionary “Left” are not engaged in politics but are part of a pyramid scheme for selling indulgences to their faithful.  Through a cascading series of cultural and social institutions this grift promises moral absolution from the plain cruelty of the society in which it’s embedded. The parties involved will not, do not want to, and cannot honestly address these cruelties through transforming our society in the fundamental ways required, but for a fee they will soothe their congregants with the reassuring notion that they are all part of the morally superior class.  

This sense of moral superiority is established in a myriad ways.  Liberal Democrats and leftists alike are inculcated into believing and perpetuating this lie through popular culture, elite education, and more recently this mission has been picked-up by significant sections of the national news media.  Encouraged to make their political alignment a core part of their self perception, Democrats become invested in convincing themselves that their political alignment is an important and meaningful decision.  It’s a powerful system of deception and perhaps specifically because it has no basis in meaningful political outcomes entire industries of professional pundits, speakers, academics, nonprofits and other agents of cultural production have risen up to promote and bolster its central claim of moral superiority.

Through this pyramid structure individuals at every level become invested in not only believing in the superior morality of their alignment,  but in demonstrating it and attempting to spread it to others.  Some on the left might argue that they are not part of the mainstream Democratic Party and therefore not enmeshed in this system.  However, this same kind of dynamic exists on the left.  In fact, individuals within the pyramid on the left are often even more extreme in their commitment to its main tenet of moral superiority and absolution for the self.  Many have recognized the hollowness and unreality of the Democratic Party branding, but instead of identifying the system of control it represents and breaking free, they reproduce it, doubling down on the morally self-righteous, evangelical spirit in their self-perception.  Because very few actually exit the boundaries of American duopoly, leftists still remain within the greater Democratic Party alignment, or forfeit any political relevance by loudly disengaging entirely to signal their purity.

Plenty of leftwing media exists to fill out the small pyramid within the larger one of the Democratic Party.  Podcasts, magazines and social media provide a steady flow of morally self-righteous content that promises to absolve the culpability of its consumers for a five dollar monthly subscription fee.  Podcasters collect tens of thousands of dollars a month from “patrons'' in order to record themselves getting mad at the news.  Breadtubers film pedantic screeds against alt-right trolls to attract eyeballs for Google's targeted advertisements, and rose-emoji twitter users spend day and night harassing, and dog piling journalists, other leftists and random nobodies like themselves for the quick hit libidinal thrill of simulated mob violence.

This Left media griftonomy may make a sport out of bashing Democrats, but when it comes time to endorse the top of the pyramid they will almost invariably toe the party line.  They may not do so enthusiastically, but the disciplining of their audiences with browbeating and the dubious “lesser-of-two-evils” arguments functions to reinforce the dominance of duopoly, us vs them thinking.  Ultimately the anti-establishment Left finds itself aligned with the Democrats time and time again.  It’s a symbol of the social and cultural buy-in to the pyramid scheme that in 2021 the “Socialist” left finds itself mainly fighting to become a junior partner in the Democratic coalition.

It’s important to note that the reason this works is because the Democratic Party as a brand is assiduously walled off from the actual political functions of the State.  The formal system of theatrical republican governance that we watch play out on television is a rationalization of the informal substructural morass of elite relationships, lunch meetings, lobbying firms and industry groups that function to push and pull on the various levers of state power.  The Democratic Party as a part of formal governance exists as a branch of establishment power and works to rationalize the needs and interests of the powerful within the system of American Governance.  

The Democratic Party as a brand, as the party of indulgences, exists to corral donations from credulous party members and do-gooders, funnelling them into the cash-lubed circle jerk of well connected political consultants, media buyers and strategists at the center of the Party.  This is a major part of what the Party has evolved into and now dominates its public facing institutions.  As technological changes have driven the national news media into an openly partisan business model they have been absorbed into this structure as well.

This is what leads to all the obnoxious bleating Leftists begin to emit every time Democrats gain control of the Federal government.  Because the brand the Party campaigns on is unconnected to their goals once in power the Left is in a constant uproar over the dissonance created between the two.   Despite their supposedly low opinion of the Democrats, the Left’s close identification with the Democratic Party is illustrated by their eternally high expectations of the Party leaders.  This almost subconscious affinity unmasks Leftist’s participation in the pyramid scheme every time they begin incessantly screeching upon the Party’s betrayal of some progressive campaign promise, or refusal to adopt popular progressive policy in favor of less popular corporate giveaways.  Luckily, each instance of betrayal can spin-up a news cycle and keep the outrage machine clunking along for one more week.  Through this endless succession of meltdowns everyone is able to keep their audiences entertained, their influencer status secure, and the number of subscription fees flowing into their bank accounts increasing month after month.

Somewhat more absurdly, thousands of amateur Leftists spend countless hours donating their attention to tech companies that then auction it off to advertisers.  Each one of these little people tirelessly seeking their 15 seconds of viral fame, a pat on the head from their favorite influencer, or delighting in the public humiliation of some Bad Person.  The parasocial relationships these individuals construct through tech platforms may provide the necessary stimulation to keep them engaged, but it’s not clear it provides any political empowerment.  If anything it seems to disempower them by keeping everyone in a constant state of high arousal, obsessively investing in a fantasy world created primarily by those in a position to make a living off of it.  In a sense average users of these platforms are victims, but like all pyramid schemes they are also willing participants in an abusive system.

No one on the Left seems to accept the reality that their “political” activity is dependent entirely on technology that is openly created for social engineering, and owned by massive financialized monopolies.  These corporations have demonstrated repeatedly, not only that they believe they are above or, maybe even beyond governance, but that they will use their control over critical infrastructure to silence and even financially sanction anyone who presents a true threat to their interests.  That anyone operating in these spaces could believe they are a threat to the establishment is baffling.  Unless, of course a desire for radical change that challenges the powerful is less a political ambition and more a branding exercise.

I’m sure there is a strong argument that I am being far too harsh.  That people on the Left really do want to change society for the better, and are doing their best within whatever context they exist day to day.  We all need jobs, isn’t it better to have a professional media class to spread and advocate Left-wing ideas?  Doesn’t the fact that this professional class can exist on the Left demonstrate a remarkable growth in the popularity of Socialism?  

I understand the desire to believe these things, and quite recently would probably have expressed similar sentiments.  My point is not to criticize individuals, or chastise public figures for not being pure enough in their political action.  My purpose in articulating these frustrations is to try and wake myself up to the realities of our situation.  The possibility of political change that many American’s cling to, both on the Left and the Right, seems ever present, but at the same time eternally elusive.  There is a pervasive sense among anyone actively concerned about the path our political leaders are taking that we are on the precipice of some great catastrophe.  We live in perpetual anticipation of a disaster that will deal the final blow to a system weakened by elite corruption and decades of faltering legitimacy. 

It’s imagined that in the wake of such a cataclysm there may be an opening in public will, a spontaneous realignment that will always benefit us, and not them.  That is of course if we’re able to keep the faith.  Keep the ecosystem which supports the “ideas” running and growing.  What this always seems to miss is that things are changing.  Forces are acting to fundamentally reshape society at every moment and we understand ourselves to be struggling against a static foe, or stuck in a kind of political stasis only to the extent that our ideology blinds us to these forces moving us and everything else.

I want to understand the larger forces at work, and step beyond the rhetoric and ideology framing American’s understanding of how our society is structured.  The degree to which we buy into narratives around conflict and moral choices within our current system is the degree to which these forces are obscured in our understanding.  My project is to dig out of these ideologies and attempt to order my perception of the world in a way that allows structures of control and domination specific to our time to be dealt with head on.  

Part of this project is recognizing our current disempowerment.  Our lack of any structure or institution by which to effect change on our society.  The old Left will continue to make a lesser of two evils argument about the Democrats, and cling to their cultural affinity with elite liberals, and the hopeful upper middle classes.  They will continue to construct elaborate justifications for collaboration with the current system.  I believe these Leftists have failed to come to grips with the structural realities of our current society.

Those who still hold out hope for a spontaneous resurgence of populism in the form of a multi-racial, working class uprising led by the Left, have failed to recognize the true toll that atomization and deindustrialization have taken on the younger generations.  Many young people are uncomfortable talking to their friends on the phone.  The organization and administration of a mass political movement capable of truly challenging power in the US requires social skills, emotional control, and a set of cultural context that simply no longer exist for most of our society.

To the extent that a mainstream American Leftism can be forged by the younger generations it will be a reflection of power as it shapes society. The inequality of our current system virtually guarantees that this shape cannot reflect a popular will. Much like successful leftists of today, individuals who find prominence and power within such a future will mythologize their position as proof of their personal virtue along with the success and progress of their ideas. The fact that taken as a whole, the structures and inequalities they deride in the greater society have reproduced themselves within their tiny slice of the pie will not occur to them as evidence that their ideology has failed to produce positive outcomes. Their own success will be the beginning and end of their self evaluation.

The idea that social organization, education and political action to fight establishment elites can be headquartered in the belly of corporate tech products ignores the material reality of that effort.  At most it can only propel those systems into a hardening of their authoritarianism.  The rhetoric of the left may be adopted by these institutions but the exercise of their power will reflect the material interests of the financial elite who own and operate them.

In effect, activism on these platforms is co-opted by the tech monopolies to further their own ends. For example, reliance on these exploitative systems to fight establishment political formations may weaken those formations, but that weakening redounds to the benefit of the private monopolies who wish to wrest power away from those older, more traditionally democratic institutions. They see this benefit while maintaining control over the infrastructure on which this organization and activism relies. This dynamic effectively gives them a veto over any action that might threaten their interests, either directly or indirectly.

The first step to extricating oneself from this hopeless situation is recognizing it’s contradictions.  Taken as one, there is little difference between Republican rule and Democratic rule.  They are both part of the same system of control and programmed with the same trajectory.  In this way the Left and Right are both trapped inside the same prison.  The individual’s choice within it is limited to which cell-mates one prefers.

I don’t hold out any hope that the figures helming the institutions of the Left in 2021 will decide to give up their livelihoods and break with this Democratic pyramid scheme.  Particularly when the tantalizing vision of seeing their own language and rhetoric adopted within the halls of elite power hangs so closely outside their grasp.  Nor do I expect committed Democrats to recognize their abusive, and mistaken self-identification with moral rectitude.  The power of identity is one wielded carelessly and recklessly by the Left and the Right in America today.  It’s a force within individuals that responds to challenge by hardening until it is too brittle to be held without shattering.  While I believe that the mainstream liberals may be approaching this point the new formations on the Left appear more resilient, trading mass appeal for a renewed religiosity and evangelical fervor.  

A new set of elites may work their way into prominent nodes of corporate and public power, but institutional inertia and historical forces will shape the future.  Ideas and the language used to describe them are emergent from this process.  We react to our reality, and justify it afterward.  The language used is not indicative of the underlying process, and is more akin to the paint on a freight train than the engine or the fuel that powers it.  Predicting the future is a futile endeavor, but if we want to understand how to organize and act in the present we need to look beyond the comfortable ideologies and convenient myths provided by an exploitative structure, and order our perceptions in a more useful and empowering way.